---
layout: page
permalink: /autoethnography/
title: Autoethnography
description: A list of useful autoethnography papers
---

This page is a list of papers supporting the talk I gave at the National Research Methods Festival on 26 October 2021.

[Autoethnography as Method](https://www.routledge.com/Autoethnography-as-Method/Chang/p/book/9781598741230) --- *Heewon Chang* --- This methods book will guide the reader through the process of conducting and producing an autoethnographic study through the understanding of self, other, and culture. Readers will be encouraged to follow hands-on, though not prescriptive, steps in data collection, analysis, and interpretation with self-reflective prewriting exercises and self-narrative writing exercises to produce their own autoethnographic work. Chang offers a variety of techniques for gathering data on the self—from diaries to culture grams to interviews with others—and shows how to transform this information into a study that looks for the connection with others present in a diverse world. She shows how the autoethnographic process promotes self-reflection, understanding of multicultural others, qualitative inquiry, and narrative writing. Samples of published autoethnographies provide exemplars for the novice researcher to follow.

[Gendered by Design: A Duoethnographic Study of Personal Fitness Tracking Systems](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3364685) --- *Marika Cifor*, *Patricia Garcia* --- Using fitness trackers to generate and collect quantifiable data is a widespread practice aimed at better understanding one’s health and body. The intentional design of fitness trackers as genderless or universal is predicated on masculinist design values and assumptions that do not result in “neutral” devices and systems. Instead, ignoring gender in the design of fitness tracking devices marks a dangerous ongoing inattention to the needs, desires, and experiences of women, as well as transgender and gender non-conforming persons. We utilize duoethnography, a methodology emphasizing personal narrative and dialogue, as a tool that promotes feminist reflexivity in the design and study of fitness tracking technologies. Using the Jawbone UP3 as our object of study, we present findings that illustrate the gendered physical and interface design features and discuss how these features reproduce narrow understandings of gender, health, and lived experiences.

[Gaining empathy for non-routine mobile device use through autoethnography](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2556288.2557179) --- *Aisling Ann O'Kane*, *Yvonne Rogers*, *Ann E. Blandford* --- ...we report on autoethnography as a method to access non-routine usage of mobile devices, such as during business trips, vacations, etc. Autoethnography, a self-study method with the researcher as participant, was employed for the evaluation of a wrist blood pressure monitor used by people with conditions such as hypertension. The findings from the study were surprising, especially with respect to the environmental and social impact on the use of the technology. Although the autoethnographic method can be disruptive for the researcher, it enables them to understand and empathize with the experiences mobile device users can face in difficult to access contexts. This method allows HCI researchers to better understand user experiences with mobile devices, including mobile medical technology, especially during non-routine times that can be difficult to study in-situ with traditional user studies.

[Appropriated or Inauthentic Care in Gig-Economy Platforms: A Psycho-linguistic Analysis of Uber and Lyft](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3170427.3188657) --- *Austin Toombs*, *Colin Gray*, *Guoyang Zhou*, *Ann Light* --- ...we present preliminary results from a portion of an auto-ethnography in which an HCI scholar drove for both Uber and Lyft over the course of 4 months, recording his thoughts about the driving experience as well as his experiences with-and emails from-both platforms. The first phase of results we present here are based on several text analyses of the collected emails, as well as a preliminary examination of field notes in relation to these emails. We found that while Uber and Lyft participate in the gig economy in almost identical ways, the difference in tone apparent through each platform's messaging could lead to conflicting experiences for drivers. We identify implications for the potential future analyses of our autoethnographic data in relation to this psycholinguistic analysis.

[Living Without a Mobile Phone: An Autoethnography](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3196709.3196731) --- *Andres Lucero* --- ...an autoethnography of my experiences living without a mobile phone. What started as an experiment motivated by a personal need to reduce stress, has resulted in two voluntary mobile phone breaks spread over nine years (i.e., 2002-2008 and 2014-2017). Conducting this autoethnography is the means to assess if the lack of having a phone has had any real impact in my life. Based on formative and summative analyses, four meaningful units or themes were identified (i.e., social relationships, everyday work, research career, and location and security), and judged using seven criteria for successful ethnography from existing literature. Furthermore, I discuss factors that allow me to make the choice of not having a mobile phone, as well as the relevance that the lessons gained from not having a mobile phone have on the lives of people who are involuntarily disconnected from communication infrastructures.

[Autoethnography: a tool for practice and education](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1073943.1073944) --- *Sally Jo Cunningham*, *Matt Jones* --- Ethnographic techniques are useful tools for developing a fine-grained, context-based understanding of user behavior. Because conventional ethnographic studies are time-intensive, interest has grown in techniques that can be applied more rapidly, to fit within the software development cycle---a sort of 'ethnography lite'. One such promising tool is the autoethnography, in which the investigator creates an ethnographic description and analysis of his/her own behavior, attempting to develop an objective understanding of the behaviors and work context under consideration by casting the investigator as both the informant 'insider' and the analyst 'outsider'. We demonstrate the potential of the autoethnography in HCI education through a case study of an HCI assignment in which autoethnography informs requirements analysis and system design. This paper argues that the autoethnography has a role to play in software development and is a useful teaching tool for HCI courses.

[Easier Said than Done: Writing an Autoethnography](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/160940690800700103) --- *Sarah Wall* --- Autoethnography is an intriguing and promising qualitative method that offers a way of giving voice to personal experience for the purpose of extending sociological understanding. The author's experience of writing an autoethnography about international adoption has shown her, however, that autoethnography can be a very difficult undertaking. In writing her autoethnography, she confronted anxiety-producing questions pertaining to representation, balance, and ethics. As well, she dealt with the acceptability of her autoethnography by informal and formal reviewers. In this article she discusses the challenges she faced in her autoethnographic project to inform future autoethnographers and to inspire them to share their experiences and reflections. For the author questions linger, but she hopes that sharing issues that arise in autoethnographic work will strengthen our understandings of this challenging yet highly promising form of inquiry.

[An anxious alliance](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.7146/aahcc.v1i1.21146) --- *Kaiton Williams* --- ...a multi-year autoethnographic perspective on the use of personal fitness and self-tracking technologies to lose weight. In doing so, it examines the rich and contradictory relationships with ourselves and our world that are generated around these systems, and argues that the efforts to gain control and understanding of one's self through them need not be read as a capitulation to rationalizing forces, or the embrace of utopian ideals, but as an ongoing negotiation of the boundaries and meanings of self within an anxious alliance of knowledge, bodies, devices, and data. I discuss how my widening inquiry into these tools and practices took me from a solitary practice and into a community of fellow travellers, and from the pursuit of a single body goal into a continually renewing project of personal possibility.

[Out of the blue and into it: Autoethnography, emotions and complicated grief](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/14687941211033456) --- *Georgie Akehurst*, *Susie Scott* --- Autoethnography can be an appropriate method for researching complex emotional experiences. However, the highly self-reflexive processes involved in mining personal data are subject to a set of cultural feeling and display rules, which obscure and interfere with emotional engagement. To illustrate this, we present one author’s account of using autoethnography to research traumatic bereavement. We critically revisit three myths about the method: one negative (autoethnography is narcissistically self-indulgent) and two positive (autoethnographic techniques are therapeutic and autoethnographic writing is authentic). Observing some parallels between topic and method, we suggest that both are complicated and non-linear, following convoluted paths. Autoethnographic tales may defy the social rules of verbal tellability, failing to reveal personal insights or offer moral lessons. We conclude that, while we can admire the autoethnographic endeavour towards ‘heartfelt’ scholarship, this should be tempered by a cautiousness about the costs of digging deep.

[Reliability and Inter-rater Reliability in Qualitative Research: Norms and Guidelines for CSCW and HCI Practice](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3359174) --- *Nora McDonald*, *Sarita Schoenebeck*, *Andrea Forte* --- What does reliability mean for building a grounded theory? What about when writing an auto-ethnography? When is it appropriate to use measures like inter-rater reliability (IRR)? Reliability is a familiar concept in traditional scientific practice, but how, and even whether to establish reliability in qualitative research is an oft-debated question. For researchers in highly interdisciplinary fields like computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) and human-computer interaction (HCI), the question is particularly complex as collaborators bring diverse epistemologies and training to their research. In this article, we use two approaches to understand reliability in qualitative research. We first investigate and describe local norms in the CSCW and HCI literature, then we combine examples from these findings with guidelines from methods literature to help researchers answer questions like: "should I calculate IRR?" Drawing on a meta-analysis of a representative sample of CSCW and HCI papers from 2016-2018, we find that authors use a variety of approaches to communicate reliability; notably, IRR is rare, occurring in around 1/9 of qualitative papers. We reflect on current practices and propose guidelines for reporting on reliability in qualitative research using IRR as a central example of a form of agreement. The guidelines are designed to generate discussion and orient new CSCW and HCI scholars and reviewers to reliability in qualitative research.
